---
layout: post
title: Madames Made Me
author: sophia
tags: [women, history, culture]
---

Although only one week of Women's History month remains, we should perpetually practice gratitude for the women that shape and influence the world as we know it and leave a positive impact on our lives. These are the survivors of prejuduice, forced to take on subservient roles and debilitated identities across all nations by the opposite sex and even amongst their ranks. A manifold of attempts to unite for equality by visionaries, liberators, and educators on the struggles and supression of women were long silenced and resisted throughout history, leaving the state of progress in ambiguity. The vox populi thus far is largely passive to these attenuated conditions because the affirmation of women's rights would take more than a singular movement and ancillary "waves" to challenge the predominate paradigm and ethos. 

In Plato's *Republic* (*see [Book V*](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/1497/1497-h/1497-h.htm#link2H_4_0008)) in the context of the political zeitgeist of Athens, the philosopher argued for greater independence and freedoms to women, but principally overlooks the nuances for systematic liberation of the individual female, as his interests lay in the servitude and *engenderment* of an ideal society. 

True partisans of women's civil rights recognize their gross, but diverse experiences and the complexities to afford them equal dignity, respect, expression, and opportunities. Apart from the essence of the fundamental obligation to bilateral enfranchisement, the relevance of achieving gender equality is an essential impetus for the growth and prosperity of the human race. Without the contributions of key women and their wisdom, I would not be the woman I am today giving you this article and the ones to follow. I embody my inspiration in the following list of remarkable women throughout my life.

A portion of this compilation contains renowned figures, others unfamiliar. Your list will likely differ as I draw extensively pioneers in STEM (Astronomy especially) and aggregate of personal interests that reflect my own journey representing women of color. If your list is scant, I offer you these names for your consideration--even perhaps your next muse.

Several women fall under multiple categories (alphabetical), corroborating to the veracity that women are boundlessly multifacted and talented, enriching, capable, and *riveting* (hopefully you know the allegorical icon as well).

**Activists**
✵ Malala Yousafzai
✵ Rachel Carson
✵ bell hooks

**Architects**
✵ Julia Morgan

**Artists (Musicians)**
✵ Rezz
✵ Lana Del Rey
✵ Gwen Stefani
✵ Rihanna
✵ Lady Gaga
✵ Deborah de Luca
✵ Patti Smith 
✵ Joan Jett
✵ Siiickbrain

**Artists (Painters)**
✵ Frida Kahlo
✵ Georgia O'Keeffe
✵ Hilma af Klint
✵ Else Bostelmann

**Astronomers**
✵ Sandra Farber
✵ Nia Imara
✵ Henrietta Leavitt
✵ Vera Rubin
✵ Jocelyn Bell
✵ Maria Mitchell
✵ Cecilia Payne
✵ Annie Jump Cannon
✵ Nancy Grace Roman

**Athletes**
✵ Simone Biles
✵ Scout Forsythe
✵ Nastia Liukin
✵ Chloe Kim
✵ Ronda Rousey

**Designers**
✵ Vivienne Westwood
✵ Yuko Shimizu

**Philosophers**
✵ Hannah Arendt
✵ Susanne Langer
✵ Emily Levine

**Scientists, Physicists, and Mathematicians**
✵ Sabine Hossenfelder
✵ Marie Curie
✵ Mae Jemison
✵ Sally Ride
✵ Grace Hopper
✵ Hedy Lamarr

**Writers**
✵ Sylvia Plath
✵ Emily Dickinson
✵ Mary Shelley
✵ Toni Morrison
✵ Virginia Woolf
✵ Ursula K. Le Guin

Saving the best for last, **Carli Smith**. You would do well to know her name before she is laureled as an esteemed nuclear physicist, marathon runner and climber, writer, peanut butter guru, and anything she sets her mind to. This humble girl absolutely SENDS it, as we inspire and uphold each other to the stars. Sometimes I quip that my heart only belongs to two people: Carl Sagan and Carli Smith 🖤
