---
layout: post
title: Use It
author: Sophia Medallon
tags: personal lifestyle science books
---

“…or lose it.” I tested this proverb for 7 months, intending to take a break from numbers, maximizing efficiency, analyzing every detail, and wanting to reshape my perspective with my toil against perfection. (Remember when [Solaria Chip tried posting everyday](https://solariachip.com/Scaling-Cadence/)? Then I trained nonstop for 2 months into [my first marathon](https://results.svetiming.com/big-sur/events/2024/big-sur-international-marathon/2349/entrant?share=1). I just love to send it.

I was unemployed for more than half a year back in California, so any semblance of a structured schedule could not be fulfilled appropriately (among other “excuses”). I spent 7 months scouring job boards, and not doing much else. I would only leave my house a couple times to go to an interview or buy weed. I spent so much time with my cat, Stone, sleeping and eating together. Physically, I gained almost 1.5 Stone, and mentally, I endured another test of my will [to be](https://poets.org/poem/hamlet-act-iii-scene-i-be-or-not-be). But now, Stone the cat gives me biscuits on my fluffy bod.
After I completely stopped running, weight lifting, rock climbing, kayaking, I averaged no more 1,000 steps a day by walking to the kitchen for snacks into total deconditioning. In any case, the extra weight didn’t bother me as much as the limitations I often liked to push myself to. 

The principle of “use it or lose it” isn’t a novel idea, but my experiment in utter deterioration has posed the to reevaluate the importance of neuroplasticity. 

As for my athletic capabilities, my pace suffered, while my endurance and overall mileage completely tanked. I haven’t yet measured my VO2 Max, which was at 50 in June 2024. After 7 months I could barely run the minimum of 5 kilometers I’d be doing on a daily basis, stopping often and channeling my best [Jeff Galloway](https://www.jeffgalloway.com/training/run-walk/). After a week of Run Walk Runs, I finally picked up a barbell inside a gym. Typically, I’ve been able to push my personal record the most with back squats, at 111 kg or 245 lbs while staying fairly lean. My comfortable high-rep range is around half, at 60 kg (135 lbs), popping squats for one plate (20 kg) easily. After losing 7 months of muscle, I lost 60% of my maximum strength. My epic gym training-arc [comeback](https://www.health.harvard.edu/exercise-and-fitness/staying-in-shape-a-case-of-use-it-or-lose-it) was marked with struggling to hoist the plate onto the bar and farting out 5 pathetic reps before worrying about my spine. 

At the molecular level, the muscles are the most adaptable tissue in our body. Musculoskeletal and nervous system adaptations meet in the middle with motor learning, which was possibly reflected by a poor running form or cringe-worthy squat. Ultimately, the mind and body are meant to burn energy and they are connected.

I hoped to make another measurement with language learning, when I was practicing Spanish everyday for a few minutes, but in anticipation for travel, I’m now learning にほんご! Prioritizing languages has always been difficult: my neuroplasticity was drastically changed when I came to the United States from the Philippines at 8 years old and stopped speaking Tagalog to absorb Oxford dictionaries and [the best English grammar and writing book](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/37134/37134-h/37134-h.htm). In high school, I perfected my uvular fricative in French enough to get me by at the cafés in Paris. Sometimes, when I forget a Spanish translation, my mind seeks some sort of French-Latin amalgamation. Python is supposed to be intuitive, but since I go through long periods of time without needing to use it, I forget many things. But HTML, which I learned from designing Gaia Online profiles as my first pseudo-hustle in elementary school, is always easy for me to pick up where I left off.
I love the English language for its prose and writing, which is what I intend to practice more of as we rekindle our project Solaria Chip. 

My overall creativity with drawing and painting has suffered over the years, since I took on less projects that required it. It was a skill I honed at a young age with pleasure, when children especially are able to mass produce their imaginations to crayons and paper. Without too much practice now I’m merely a poser, as I demand references and have to dig deeper for original ideas. I mainly drew pretty women, so that’s what I can do without much effort. Long term, I wonder if it would have an impact on [my clamor for aesthetics](https://solariachip.com/In-Praise-of-Bad-Art/), if I ever stopped making art. 

Exercise, language, creative outlets, and skill-building activities utilizes your brain’s cognitive function that improves its neuroplasticity. By [The Defining Decade](https://megjay.com/the-defining-decade/)’s standards, I’ve had a bit of lag from failing to assert my goal. The response from these actions conducts your brain in a constant state of learning, which is the most important principle not for the sake of longevity, but purpose. Always stay curious, always stay a student, always be in wonder, and always be learning. Gain knowledge and create from experience. *Follow the principles that let you do this.* I like “use it or lose it” because it’s short and sweet that sends a good message, like our future posts as Solaria Chip breaks out of hiatus.
